Adverse job market data could cause our
measure to weaken at the end of
September because consumers will
perceive that as a signal that companies
are now looking to let people go and
they might be next.
[Music]
>> Hi everyone, welcome to WSJ's take on
the week. I'm Gjin Banerjee
>> and I'm Telus Deeos. So Gungjin, it
seems like the bond market is back in
focus. Uh we had a few moves this week
which really grabbed everyone's
attention. First of all, we had the US
Treasury the 30-year US Treasury bond,
the long-term US bond market. Those
yields hit 5%, a level that kind of
scares everybody. That only rarely has
been hit in recent years.
>> Everyone freaks out when like yields
start going crazy, right? I think the
past few years we've seen these moments
of turmoil in the bond market have
sometimes been accompanied by volatility
in the stock market.
>> Absolutely. No, I think I think
investors still have this kind of idea
that the bond market is sort of smarter
or kind of more long-term and kind of
more perceptive in some ways than the
stock market, right? The smart money uh
is in bonds. But you had similar moves
around the world, too, which is I think
really what put it on everyone's radar.
You had UK guilts, 30-year UK government
bonds known as guilts. Those were
hitting their highest levels since 1998,
those yields. Uh and then you saw the
same jitters in France and Japan, too.
Those yields hit multi-deade highs.
What's What's going on? Why Why is the
bond market doing this? Do we do we
know?
>> I feel like there's a lot of things
happening in the bond market right now.
You know, domestically, there are some
concerns about Federal Reserve
independence with, you know, President
Trump attempting to fire Lisa Cook.
We're seeing that play out right now.
She's filing a suit against the
government saying, "Hey, you can't fire
me." The Justice Department is opening
an investigation into her. So I it feels
like that's driving a lot of the
volatility in the market recently and it
hasn't even been that jarring yet. I
think we may still see more volatility
stemming from concerns about Federal
Reserve independence. You know if that
is tarnished that could lead to higher
inflation could lead to you know more
volatility in bond yields and it's
literally something that affects every
investor on the planet. And I guess the
fear there just just kind of putting
myself in the market's frame of mind is
that if the Fed is in the future going
to be an extension of the of of of the
president, right? Then you know when the
president wants rates to come down, then
you know the market's feeling is that
like well then the Fed will not act
judiciously to slow the economy when
things are running too hot. you'll have
inflation and that will sort of, you
know, the the money that you're being
paid back on those long-term fixed
bonds, you're not getting paid back the
same dollars because the currency has
been debased. And you've seen
corresponding moves in gold, right? Gold
hit another all-time high this past
week. Some bulls were now talking about
$5,000 an ounce. It's now around like
3500 or so, just for context. So, that's
like another huge move there. tariffs
are in the news because the, you know,
trade court decision ruling that
President Trump's reciprocal tariffs
were basically an sort of illegal use of
his power. Um, and an appeals court
upheld that. President Trump wants to
take that to the Supreme Court. Does
that have a link to what's going on in
the bond market, too?
>> I think a lot of people are still
waiting to see the extent to which
tariffs will ripple through inflation.
We might get more on that in the coming
week with with CPI data. And I think
it's showing up in in some subtle ways
that people may not be watching. I was
reading that worldwide the average cost
of shipping a 40ft container has fallen
for 11 consecutive weeks to around
$2,100.
This this signals a shift in behavior
among among all these different parties.
>> And so that means what? That that people
are not importing as much that they're
really changing how they do business.
>> It it shows that tariffs Yeah. It shows
that people are being more cautious
about how they're navigating this time
and that even though, you know, on a
headline level, we're not seeing this
big jump in in inflation. These tariffs
are impacting businesses, they're
impacting manufacturers and retailers.
>> Meanwhile, of course, we have the stock
market that that that little neighbor of
the bond market and um you know, the
stock market has uh you know, sort of
churned along. I don't think really any
of the moves lately have been of a kind
of huge shift in sentiment. And I think
a little September volatility we started
with after Labor Day and people do
expect this to be kind of a rocky month
typically.
>> And you've pointed out that September is
often a tough time for stocks, right?
That's historically the case.
>> Yeah, there can be it can be one of the
most volatile months. I think the autumn
months typically are.
>> Well, uh the consumer is of course uh in
focus as as always in the stock market
and we had some recent retail reports
that were kind of interesting, right? I
guess you know the journal had this
great article about how the middle the
middle class consumer
>> is feeling squeezed right now and we saw
that in Koh's recent earnings report
where you know their leaders said hey
people are trading down to cheaper
products and their lower and middle
inome consumers are really feeling
crunched right now
>> and you saw the boost in Dollar Tree
sales right Tree being like the
basically the cheapest place you can go
to shop so that's always kind of what
people expect to see there
>> yeah that's like a recession indicator
almost right when Dollar Tree is doing
really well.
>> So, of course, all this brings us to
consumer sentiment, consumer confidence.
How how is the consumer feeling about
the economy right now? And we had the
most recent update from the conference
board, which is a think tank for
business leaders, and they they have a
widely followed confidence measure. And
their August report um was uh mixed,
right? uh they said quote rising worries
about jobs and income offset more
optimistic views of current and future
business conditions. Right? So their uh
kind of headline index is about where
it's been over the last few years which
was lower than it was at kind of that
post-pandemic peak of confidence but
also well above where it was during
those like 2010 great recession kind of
lows were. Right. So like it's it's
about kind of average I'd say in recent
years. I have this thesis that the stock
market is more important for sentiment
than it's ever been before. And Telus,
you and I have talked about this, how
stock holdings as a share of financial
assets, household net worths are at
records. And just makes me wonder,
right, does that mean that the stock
market at a record means that all these
401k millionaires that empowers them to
spend? It makes them feel better about
the market. So I feel like there is more
of a feedback loop between
>> the stock market sentiment and spending
than there might have been in the past.
>> So all of that positivity
sometimes doesn't show up in the data.
Right. the the the journal had a recent
um survey of its own and they they
talked to some um people who who've
looked at at confidence and said that
that you would think that based on where
the stock market is that people would
feel confident and like you saw you know
like I said in the in the conference
board you know people think business
conditions are improving right and part
of that uh is the stock market but but
again you still have some data
especially the the sort of the Michigan
sort of index showing sentiment being
very low so I just I just think there's
a bit of a mystery or a disconnect and
I'm having trouble kind of sorting out
what is actually going on with the
consumer because you know people are
buying
>> the stock market's up the job market is
mostly pretty good but sentiment is down
by some measures but not by others. So,
I called in an expert. Uh, our guest
>> phoned a friend.
>> I phoned a friend. Phoned a friend. The
our guest this week is Dana Peterson.
She is a uh she did economic research at
Cityroup for a long time and now she is
the chief economist at the conference
board. and she's going to help us figure
out what's going on in consumer
confidence and explain some of these ups
and downs and disconnects and really
just talk through why we also talk about
consumer confidence so much, what it
means for investors and also, you know,
how we should think about survey data
these days. And we're going to have that
when we come back after the break.
So, I'm here today with Dana Peterson.
She is the chief economist and leader of
the economy strategy and finance center
at the conference board. Dana, welcome
to the show.
>> Thanks so much for having me.
>> One thing I noticed was that people were
getting more optimistic about like uh
what what what you guys term business
conditions, but they were getting a
little more pessimistic about things
like job availability.
Do people feel like the overall economy
is good but not for them? Help us kind
of read through some of these kind of
conflicting signals. There are a few
people who think we are in a recession,
but as you said, there are many who
still think that there might be a
recession at some point over the next 12
months, but they are seeing stock
markets rise and they associate that
with business conditions improving. When
it comes to themselves, yes, they are
very worried about jobs. Um, certainly
when you look at the number of jobs that
are available from the Jolts data,
there's really not that much. But we
have to understand that when the economy
is at full employment, you're not going
to have a lot of hiring or a lot of job
openings, but you're also not going to
see a lot of firing or quitting. And so
those are good dynamics, but still when
consumers see things like payroll
slowing over the course of the last few
months, they conflate that with their
own um job prospects. But the
interesting thing is that they do
believe that their incomes are still
very very good and also um many people
believe that their personal finances are
in good shape not only now but will
continue to be.
>> What's the real story on inflation? Is
it something that is really kind of
picking up and and changing how people
behave or is it is it really not
something we see yet in the economy
>> for consumers? It's probably a little
less about inflation, but the price
level. So even though prices are not
rising as quickly as they did over the
last few years,
>> the level of prices are still very high.
It's still the case that you know bread
may be $10 whereas a few years ago it
was five.
>> And now even a slight increase a two two
and a half% increase you know that hurts
and that and consumers see and feel
that. And so I think a lot of the
discomfort is that they know that
tariffs induce inflation and that
inflation means that higher prices will
be higher on top of where they already
are. So I wanted to go back a little bit
and talk about this idea of the vibe
session. Um you know we had Kyla
Scandlin on this show. She was the
economic commentator who coined that
term and it's a widely kind of talked
about phenomenon which is that while the
economy is mostly doing okay, price
growth has slowed, people don't feel
good about the economy. But in the
conference boards indicators versus
those that are put out by the University
of Michigan's their consumer uh
sentiment survey, the conference boards
indicators never really looked that bad
even in the 22 23 years. What what does
that tell us about the vibe session? Was
there really such a thing in in your
view?
>> I think there was a vibe session and the
biggest difference between our measure
and the University of Michigan's at
least the overall measure are the
components. So for example, their
overall measure has more components that
point to inflation and recession,
whereas our headline has components that
allude to the labor market, business
conditions, and income. no inflation,
but we do have inflation measures and
certainly all those measures um spiked
um over the last few years because
consumers were feeling inflation and
also they complained a lot in their
writings about inflation. Nonetheless,
our measure did not fall because while
consumers may have had mixed feelings
about business conditions, they were
still working. So the labor market was
still in very good shape for them and
also their incomes are rising. And
again, a lot of that's due to the fact
that we have we had labor shortages and
also lots of people retiring. And so
companies were doing whatever they can,
throwing money at their workers to
attract really great talent and also to
keep the talent they had. It seems like
tariffs are really central to consumers
perceptions of the economy right now.
And so when you say we're not in a vibe
session anymore, I guess part of what
you're saying is that consumers have a
serious concern about how tariffs will
impact both prices and also maybe their,
you know, their their job prospects.
>> Absolutely. Yes. Consumers understand
that tariffs are not paid by foreign
countries, but ultimately it's paid by
them. and companies are saying and they
are actually doing um that they're going
to pass those higher costs on to whoever
is next in the pipeline and ultimately
it lands at the feet of consumers. So
consumers understand that and they
remember that from 2018 and 2019 and so
consumers are buying fewer durable goods
um that are imported. They're focusing
more on necessary services such as uh
financial insurance or car insurance or
even pet care. You have to feed your
pets, but they're spending less on
highly discretionary types of services.
And businesses look at that and they see
demand destruction. And businesses still
need to make their profits. So
ultimately that may mean in terms of
after they pass the higher costs on
cutting costs internally, which could
mean labor. So, let's say that tariffs
don't have that effect. When will
consumers maybe start to feel better
about the economy if these things don't
kind of materialize?
>> Well, we have to remember that there are
tariffs in place and there's a 10%
tariff on everything and certain
countries have even higher tariffs. So,
it's already there and companies are
passing those costs along and they
probably will continue to do so. Once we
have a better or better clarity on what
the tariffs look like against all
economies, it could be on average
slightly higher than where we are now.
And I think also people have been lulled
into a sense of calm because many of the
tariffs have been delayed. So, at some
point this is going to end and it is
going to land in inflation. But let's
say that you know the labor market still
holds up then I think consumers will
start to feel a little bit better. Um
but again you know in terms of making up
for lost consumption and also business
investment that's difficult to do and
indeed even if businesses do invest more
in building out factories and pipelines
and uh supply chains within the US that
takes a while. It takes 5 to 10 years to
build a chip factory. So that's not
something that we're going to see
returns on in the short run. So I think
a lot of it has to do with timing. And
then also let's not forget about the
budget bill where the budget bill is
anticipated to provide maybe a tenth or
two in terms of growth in 2026. But in
2027 and even at the end of 2026, it
starts to weigh on the economy where
consumers who may have been receiving uh
no taxes on tips, well, maybe they were
also receiving social um social benefits
and those things are going to be cut.
So, I think there's
>> there's a lot of uncertainty. Why does
consumer confidence or consumer
sentiment matter? Why is it an indicator
that that we should be paying attention
to in building into our predictions for
the market or the economy? Why should
investors overall care about consumer
confidence? We certainly talk about it a
lot, but I'm not sure I understand
exactly what it's sort of most useful
for as an indicator.
>> I guess it goes back to what, how, and
for whom. What are you making? How are
you going to make it? And who's going to
buy it? And the key thing for
corporations,
>> classic college economics, right?
>> Yes. That was the first day of Econ 101.
>> But if there's no one to buy your
product, then there's no point in making
it and there's no point in having a
company. And so consumerf facing
companies or even companies that you
know are intermediaries need to
understand what consumers are thinking.
Um sometimes what they think doesn't
match what they do. Um and that's why I
suggest that people just don't look at
the headline but look in the details. So
for example, like you said, our measure
didn't really move that much when
inflation was raging, but again, you
know, people were employed. And so if
consumers are fearing their jobs or
their employment, then they tend to pull
back. That is real. Um, and they start
economizing. And certainly that means
demand destruction for companies. And so
if companies get a whiff that consumers
are unhappy and that even if they're not
being let go, but they're holding back
on spending, then that impacts their
bottom lines. Not every index, even in
our own survey, is necessarily leading.
Um some of them are reactionary, but um
a number of measures have shown that
when consumer confidence does crater. um
and also it's linked to the labor market
that that portends uh slower economic
growth in the future.
>> So the forward picture for sentiment
sounds like it might be kind of
complicated right on the one hand you've
got inflation expectations that might
take up and that might drive some
indicators whereas you know the labor
market whether we get a good or bad jobs
report I mean that might drive that
might tell a different story for for
some of your indicators. Um, so what
what do you think we might see play out
over the next, you know, the next couple
of indicator releases?
>> Yes. Uh, just thinking about Michigan
again, their headline contains a number
of indicators that relate to inflation.
And we saw in the most recent inflation
reading for personal consumption
expenditures that inflation is rising
both overall and also less volatile
components like food and energy. And
indeed, when we look where inflation is
rising, it's definitely rising among
goods. Um, especially those goods that
would be important from abroad. Um, so I
would imagine that that might put
downward pressure on Michigan's measure.
For our measure, again, our measure does
not, our headline does not include
inflation. Adverse job market data could
cause our measure to weaken at the end
of September because consumers will
perceive that as a signal that companies
are now looking to let people go and
they might be next. Dana, I wanted to
ask you about survey based economic
data. The conference board does surveys.
Lots of economic data is based on
surveys. And of course, when there were
the revisions to the jobs report,
President Trump and some of his allies
were pretty upset about the way that
economic data is collected.
And we have actually been having a
debate for a long time about how to
continue doing good survey research in
an age where, you know, people don't
have landlines anymore. You can't call
them up in the same way. How has the
conference board dealt with kind of
changes in survey based research and can
we still really rely on it as an
economic indicator?
>> I think what we need to understand is
that revisions are the compromise for
getting data quickly. Right? So most
people want to know what's happening
with retail sales, inflation, trade in
real time. And so governments try to
gather that data and then publish it as
soon as they can. But it also means they
don't have all the information because
it takes time for all these surveys to
come back. And also when you think about
all the different indicators that the
government produces, there are hundreds
maybe even thousands of people who are
all playing a role in gathering that
data then cleaning it, removing outliers
and making sure it's seasonally adjusted
properly and then testing it to make
sure that it's telling the proper story
before it gets released. And you can
only do so much of that in a month's or
even a week's time. And so if markets
want to have data that's, you know,
comes out on a high frequency basis,
they have to know that there's
likelihood of revisions.
>> Yeah. How have you changed what you do
to make sure that you're still reaching
the number of people that you can that
that you need to, you know, efficiently?
>> Yes. Well, we have switched from paper
and phone surveys to online surveys, but
we also will pay um survey vendors to
ensure that we have the right number of
responses and that those responses are
representative of the de demographics of
the United States. So there's a lot of
effort that goes in and then once we get
the data back, we still have to clean it
and make sure that it's accurate and
telling the proper story and that the
story is consistent with historical
data. And so yes, you must um advance in
terms of your technology and the ways
that you collect data, but there's also
a lot of high-tech going on and making
sure that data once it reaches your
mailbox or your data redistributor that
is correct. And so there's there's no
easy way to produce data, but we need to
take the time and the care to make sure
that the data are believable and
accurate. Some people have suggested
that we switch to more kind of private
measures of the economy, right?
Companies that collect a lot of data
about, you know, how many people are
looking for jobs, you know, might be
doing, you know, might be typing Google
searches for, you know, find me a job,
things like that. Um, do you think that
that could replace government data uh at
any point in in the near future or is
there something different about the way
that the government collects data that
that still makes it the benchmark, you
know, uh, even if it it has to modernize
in some ways?
>> Well, private data are important, but
oftent times private data providers
benchmark off of government indicators.
And so there's still a strong place for
the government. And let's also think
about the scope and the scale and the
cost. There's no other entity on the
planet like the US government that has
the resources in terms of people and the
dollars, the amount of money, billions
of dollars to produce data and also the
ability to um ensure that the data makes
sense. And so there's really not a good
replacement for government data. Can it
be improved? Absolutely. and always and
at all times um the BLS the BEA are
working to improve their survey
techniques and also how they clean and
prepare the data for public
distribution. Um so I think there's
always uh room for improvement but it
would be very difficult to replace the
service that the government is providing
in terms of giving government data that
we can trust. We're going to take a
quick break and when we come back we've
got one last question for Dana Peterson
of the Conference Board.
All right, we're back. We've got one
last question for Dana Peterson. She's
the chief economist at the conference
board. Dana, one thing I've noticed is
that when when one looks at consumer
sentiment and confidence data, there's
actually a lot of like kind of
subindicators within that. You have
people's perceptions of the job market,
of prices, of the likelihood of
recession, of their personal economy
versus the national economy, of all
those things. Which is the one that you
think is really important to pay
attention to right now? What should
markets and investors and economists be
be focused on at this very moment?
>> I think the labor market indicators are
the most important to focus on. Again,
if consumers are not confident about
having a job in the future, then they
will cut back on their spending and that
will also place a drag on the economy.
So, as long as consumers have buoyant
views of their not only the labor market
in general, but also their employment
prospects, then we should see um
improvement in confidence. But if
consumers believe that they're going to
be laid off, then they are going to pull
back and that's going to weigh on the
economy. That's very interesting because
I know, you know, I've covered um kind
of a lot of lending companies for a long
time and and they often say the same
thing. You know, you can look at
whatever indicator you want, but it's
really jobs. Jobs, if people are
working, uh they can kind of weather
things. If they're not, well, then look
out below. Dana Peterson, thank you so
much for joining us. This has been a
very interesting conversation.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]
You had Macy's CEO calling consumers
choiceful, which I had to look up. Is
that a word? It is a word. And it turns
out, and you know, our uh our our
colleagues over at CNBC had a story
about this um a couple years ago that
it's like a new CEO favorite word,
choiceful. So add that to your sort of
business speak lexicon.
[Music]